Create CL-2023-06-12.md (#7271)
dotnet/csharplang: meetings/working-groups/collection-literals/CL-2023-06-12.md

# Collection literals working group meeting for June 12, 2023

## Agenda

* API shape for BCL collections to opt-into collection literals support.

## Discussion

LDM and Runtime members met and discussed the shapes we think we'll want in the runtime to allow a type to either opt into collection-literals support entirely, or to opt into an extremely efficient approach to constructing an instance of itself.

> Note: for the following discussion, the code shown is a rough approximation of what we think is needed.  Exact naming, order of arguments, `return` vs `out` discussion will happen during bikeshedding later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: for the following discussion, the code shown is a rough approximation of what we think is needed.  Exact naming, order of arguments, `return` vs `out` discussion will happen later.
```

public class CollectionBuilderAttribute(Type FactoryType, string MethodName) : System.Attribute
{
}
```

When present on a type `T`, this identifies a static factory method `MethodName` found on type `FactoryType` which can be used to construct an instance of `T`. Several factory shapes will be supported.  Note: The type `T` and the `FactoryType` are allowed to be the same type.  These shapes may also be expanded upon in the future if motivating scenarios exist for them.

### Shape 1: `ReadOnlySpan<T>` as input

The first shape we support is the following:

```c#
[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableHashSet), "Create")]
public class ImmutableHashSet<T> { /*...*/ }

public static class ImmutableHashSet
{
    public static ImmutableHashSet<T> Create<T>(ReadOnlySpan<T> values);
}
```

Here, the factory method takes a `ReadOnlySpan` of values and returns an instance of the final collection.  The compiler would then translate in the following fashion:

```c#
ImmutableHashSet<int> values = [1, 2, 3];

// translates to:
ReadOnlySpan<int> __values = [1, 2, 3];
ImmutableHashSet<int> values = ImmutableHashSet.Create<int>(__values);
```

> This pattern will allow pointing at methods that already exist for this purpose, as well as allowing the runtime to add new methods to some existing types to allow them to be created from spans.  A similar shape that we want to support is practically the same as the above, except that the factory method can be a constructor of the type.  Continuing the example of above, that would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pattern will allow pointing at methods that already exist for this purpose, as well as allowing the runtime to add new methods to existing types to allow them to be created from spans.  A similar shape that we want to support is practically the same as the above, except that the factory method can be a constructor of the type.  Continuing the example above, that would be:
```

```c#
[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableHashSet<>), ".ctor")]
public class ImmutableHashSet<T>
{
    public ImmutableHashSet(ReadOnlySpan<T> values);
}

// code:
ImmutableHashSet<int> values = [1, 2, 3];

// translates to:
ReadOnlySpan<int> __values = [1, 2, 3];
ImmutableHashSet<int> values = new ImmutableHashSet<int>(__values);
```

#### Shape 1 consequences

The above approach is desired by the runtime so they can add overloads to their existing construction methods that allow the more efficient use of spans over more expensive collection types (arrays, IEnumerables, etc.).  However, this raises a problem given that these types normally have existing construction methods that take an `IEnumerable<T>`.  Consider, for example:

```c#
public class HashSet<T>
{
    // existing constructor
    public HashSet(IEnumerable<T> values);

    // newly added
    public HashSet(ReadOnlySpan<T> values);
}

// code:
new HashSet<int>(new int[] { 1, 2, 3 });
```

> With the rules of the language today, the above is ambiguous.  This is unfortunate as a prime reason to create Span overloads of methods is to allow for efficient options for callers that do not need to use the heap.  We believe this should be fixed, and the WG will present a proposal to the LDM to add overload resolution rules that consider Spans better than items in the inheritance chain for arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the rules of the language today, the above is ambiguous.  This is unfortunate as a prime reason to create Span overloads of methods is to allow for efficient options for callers that do not need to use the heap.  We believe this should be fixed, and the WG will present a proposal to the LDM to add overload resolution rules that prefers `ReadOnlySpan<T>` over `IEnumerable<T>` when both are applicable.
```

Author: hrmm... i think we'd always to prefer ReadOnlySpan over things like IList/etc.   Or ReadOnlySpan over 'object'. etc.

Reviewer 2: I still feel shaky about this rule for 2 reasons:
1. It suggests making a user-defined conversion better than a standard implicit reference conversion. It feels like that's something we have avoided to date.
2. I don't see how you ship APIs that depend on this, without just saying: you can't use this from old C#, sorry.

### Shape 2: Writable `Span<T>` or `T[]` storage.

> While the above pattern is good for collection types that own their own storage arrangement, it still involves producing the sequence one end, and then processing it to produce the file result within the factory method.  This is unnecessary overhead for a couple of very important, widely used, collections in the .Net ecosystem.  Specifically, `List<T>` and `ImmutableArray<T>`.  Both of these types are thin wrappers around a backing array, and it is highly desirable to just be able to write directly into that array without any overhead at all.  To that end, the above attribute can be used to point to a factory method with the following shape:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the above pattern is good for collection types that own their own storage arrangement, it still involves producing the sequence one end, and then processing it to produce the final result within the factory method.  This is unnecessary overhead for a couple of very important, widely used, collections in the .NET BCL.  Specifically, `List<T>` and `ImmutableArray<T>`.  Both of these types are thin wrappers around a backing array, and it is highly desirable to just be able to write directly into that array without any overhead at all.  To that end, the above attribute can be used to point to a factory method with the following shape:
```

}

// code:
ImmutableArray<string> values = ["a", "b", "c"];

// translation:
Span<string> __storage = CollectionsMarshal.Create<string>(capacity: 3, out ImmutableArray<string> values);
__storage[0] = "a";
__storage[1] = "b";
__storage[2] = "c";
```

Depending on how the compiler encodes constant information, this could also be a case where the data is stored in the read-only section of the dll and memcpy'ed to the destination.

Note: the runtime already has methods that expose this data for high performance scenarios.  So this does not introduce any new safety concerns.  The methods are intentionally kept out of the way in the `CompilerServices` namespace to help indicate they are not for normal use, and should be treated very carefully.

#### Shape 2 consequences

The above pattern will not work as efficiently in the case where the Span cannot be kept on the stack while evaluating the elements of the collection literal (for example, if there are `await` calls in the literal.  An alternative/complimentary approach that could be offered would be to have the following:

```c#
public static class CollectionsMarshall
{

>     public static void Create<T>(int capacity, out ImmutableArray<T> result, out Span<T> storage); // or:

Reviewer: The first overload here is also in the example above. Is that intentional?

Author: yes.  was showing them together so the diff could be seen.
